as well as banking products and services to Brasmus Valley citizens.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turbavill. When Gerald
McCaskill boarded the battleship USS Tennessee in June of 1944 it was the
first ship that he had ever seen. He would see plenty of it over the next 15
months including combat action throughout World War II's Pacific theater.
The Tennessee had already seen plenty of warfare including on 7 December
1941 Dr. Pearl Harbor alongside the ill-fated West Virginia and Arizona on
that day that will live in infamy. Over his time on the Tennessee its travels
took it to Saipan, Guam, Tinian, Gualcanala, Pei-Lut, the Philippines, back to
Pearl Harbor, Saipan and within a mile of the beaches of Iwojima for that
marine invasion to Mount Sarabachi. On Okinawa and eventually to Japan the
Tennessee was badly damaged at least twice after the attack on Pearl
Harbor and attack at Tinian later a suicide attack to the quarter-deck.
Gerald McCaskill has a story to tell and we are proud to welcome him to
Veterans of the Valley. Gerald it is an honor to have you here on Veterans of the
Valley and again thank you for your service. I want to move you right out of
high school you went to centerville high school and it was either stay and do
farming with your dad get a job or do what the inevitable was and that was
going to the service you knew you were going to get drafted so you joined the
Navy. Talk about that and you had a very quick training before you went on to
the Pacific. I did. I had just a menial job after I got out of high school with
a geophysical crew and knew that eventually I would be drafted and at that time
you could make a choice as to what branch of the service you want to be in and
I thought maybe the Navy might be okay because you know it was dry and not much
mud on the ship and so forth but anyway I went in March 14 I believe in 1944 and
was sent to San Diego, California for my training and normally you have about
three months of boot camp but we had six weeks and never knew why except we had
after our boot camp we had one week of work detail which was entailed
stenciling clothes for the new recruits and of course we having been in six weeks
we thought we were pretty big fellows because we did a lot of shouting at them
and so forth but anyway after that we boarded a troop transport and went to Hawaii
and we were aboard I don't remember the name of the old troop transport but
once we got to Hawaii they mustered us around on the island and we were there
about three or four days before they made assignments and there was quite a
few sailors in the group and most of them were all brand new recruits so they
divided them up among the ships needed help and it so happened that I got
the Tennessee which as it turned out I was happy that I did but what was your job?
Well during battle I was then damaged control which was a matter of when we
had damage to the ship in the lines or decking or whatever we tried to stop
the flow of water or oil or whatever was in the compartment until they could
get some of the specialists to come and repair it and I remember of course
SIPAN was where we got hit and we one of the shells hit one of the five inch
batteries and killed everybody in here and then another one hit just above the
water line and one hit on the quarter deck above our compartment where our
battle station was and it just so happened that it hit the Spud Locker where
the potatoes stored the potatoes and also broke a salt water line and our
compartment was filled it up pretty fast with potatoes and water so we got
the water stopped and of course then our duty was pretty much over as far as
that was concerned and nobody in our compartment was hurt or injured
anyway in that campaign but I think we lost seven died in about 25 or six injured
the ones that died were the ones that were around that five inch in that five inch
mount and that five inch mount gone yeah right and excuse me I'm not sure how many
people what the complement was was a five inch but anyway they were killed
instantly and the mount was on fire and about how many sailors were on the
Tennessee at this time we had about almost two thousand wow that's officers man
and cooks so it's like a small town yes and we had a barber shop and of course
which they didn't have to be specialists to be barbers and maybe but we had a
commissary where you could requisition clothes or supplies or whatever and
get sometimes it have candy and and we had a ice cream maker that you could get
a little ice cream occasionally but most generally you just took the child
that they gave you and when I first went aboard and before they assigned me to a
division or a group I was just hanging loose and I had to sleep in my hammock
in the mess hall which wasn't a great deal of fun but we got to wake up because the
cooks come in and they start hollering at your turn over your hammock and after that I got of course
I got assigned to the art division which was one of the biggest groups of men on the ship
and like I say they had chip bitters and pipe bitters and carpenter's and metal
workers and we had we even had the band was an art division wow did you you'd only
been in the Navy three months this first attack happened you've been on the ship
probably less than a month I guess what did you think I mean had you had you
envisioned that the action was going to start up that quick well no before I got
before we left Pearl Harbor to go to the Mariana's I was a friend of mine from New
York and I were just hanging out and we didn't know they were going to have gunnery practice
but all of a sudden those 14-inch guns started firing and we didn't know what to do except
we had trying to find a place to go and but it was overwhelming for me not having had any
experience or not actually knowing anything about what was going on as far as being a
border ship right right you tell me about a later on as we move on you tell me about a
situation involving Admiral Halsey being used as a decoy well that was in the Philippines
later on in the Philippines right yeah we had already you know landed and the ships were
patrolling the Philippines and the East China Sea and the seventh division which was what we
were in had six old battleships and the second division second fleet had all the new ones you
know they were swithered faster and had bigger guns and and that was Halsey's command right well
there was as I understand it from reading now there was a kind of a build up of the Japanese fleet
to come back to the Philippines and retake what they had lost and there was rumor I assumed that
they got intelligence that the fleet was north and so Halsey wanted to score a big hit and he took
all the big ships the new ship and the carriers and so forth and headed north to intercept them which
left us there at the Philippines right well while that was exactly what Japanese wanted to do they
wanted to get the Halsey out of the way and we were under the command of Olandorf and we got our
assume we had intelligence that told us that the fleet Japanese fleet was coming through Surgao
Straits and so he or somebody designed a plan whereby the ship would intercept these Japanese
fleet coming in this narrow straight and the first group that attacked them was the PT boats and
then they come on down and the destroyers started peppering them and by then our ships the
battleships were stationed across crossways so that we could fire all of our guns the Japanese
coming straight ahead could only fire their forward guns so we had them at a disadvantage and
didn't take too long for them to turn tail and get out of there well of course when they turn
we got after them again pretty good but I think the California was one of our ships I don't think
she got a shot off. I don't know that but we've got a picture coming I was a matter of fact
that's going to show both the Tennessee and the California in just a minute I want to fast forward
here a little bit the battleship Tennessee had to go back to Seattle for its major repairs after
the after the attack and you got to go home to what you hoped it'd been 30 days but it turned out not
to be 30 days you were called back called back earlier but you were able to make your way back to
Cedar Bill right? I would add yeah we moved into or we came to Bremerton, Washington which is
across the bay from Seattle and they gave two leaves we were there to be there 60 days and they
issued orders for two leave groups and of course not having had much time in the Navy I was able to
secure one of the last leaves so you got to go home for 30 days? I got to go home for 30 days
but it wasn't quite 30 days and you were called back. No they they were artists and of course I left
way out in the country and they wired a center veil right and I had an uncle live in there and he
got the telegram and brought it out to us and so I headed back and headed back back on the
Tennessee to the Philippines patrolling the East China Sea and then eventually to Iwo Jima.
He was Jima. For the to tell us a little bit about the Tennessee's role in the attack on Iwo
Jima obviously you were offshore and you were providing cover for the Marines right? Well that's true
and that was our basic program in any of the invasions. Normally we went in about five days
in advance of the landings to fire and they had spotter planes that would detect and direct
fire into the gun mounts and so forth and so we would stand off we would usually
with fire for an hour from the starboard side then which swing around and fire from the port side
and we had two crews at the port and starboard crew and they'd get to rest a little while.
I want to go ahead and go to the pictures now because I wanted to just mention your
your service at Iwo Jima because we have some photographs let's go ahead and go to those about
how old were you in this picture? 18. 18. So this is the... By the time I started... Well actually you
finished high school at 16 so you'd been in the service for a while right? Well I on my
year before my 18th birthday I had been at Sopin, Guam, Tinian, Pellu, Philippines and the battle
surrogous Drake. So you were an experienced sailor here? Yeah and you know you come back and you've
got to ribbon with all the damn stars and people said what's up how do we do you boy?
And you were proud to explain what those roll about. There's the the Tennessee right there now
this is a photograph taken in July of 19 or actually this was off port Angeloos, Washington.
Before you had boarded there this is sort of the early version before Pearl Harbor but I just
thought that was an excellent photograph that was taken from a book that you have called USS
Tennessee in World War II by Clifton Simmons and we the photograph you're about to see are all
coming from that that book. This is another photograph sort of up close the Case Matte deck and
the three inch guns but that's sort of an early version it didn't look quite like that right?
The five inch guns excuse me. Well it did not look like that when I went aboard. Right it had more
in close superstructure. That was early on. Yeah. Now we're going to move to Pearl Harbor. Right this is
December 10th three days after the attack on Pearl Harbor and what you're seeing there is the
Tennessee right beside the remains of the Sunk and West Virginia and this photo was taken from
the hall of the Oklahoma. So and again this was before you had boarded but this is the this is the
battleship that you would board and spend 15 months on. Yeah right. Okay we'll go into the next one.
This is fresh from the rebuild after after Pearl Harbor. Well if you notice Tom on on
about midway down there's some what we call blisters. Those were added. Right right afterwards.
It's amazing after the attack on Pearl Harbor it was it was up and going and repaired in about
three much time or less than three much time. This next photograph is a fascinating photograph. June
18th 1944 you are now on the ship on the fire at Sipan. Right. And this photograph I was referring to
I think this is the Tennessee and the foreground and in the background on the right that is that's
the California. Uh huh. California and Tennessee were sisters ship. I see. In the same place.
They were laid down at about the same time. I think they were completed in 1920. I'm not sure.
Is that one Emmits? And this was on 17 October 1944. I bet you can you can recall when he came on board
to address the. Yeah in fact the captain that's our captain on the left. I don't recognize it was
otherwise. But that was but that was a quite a time when the oh well yeah you know the leader
when the leader was there the main man. It didn't particularly want to have the ad on your ship.
Because you had to had to tow the mark a little. Oh I bet you're doing a lot of scrubbing. We
were flagship up here several times. A lot of cleanup before before he came. Yeah and you know
of course most of those guys were just regular people. Exactly folks and um exactly. This is at
Iwo Jima. The date is uh 19 February 1945 is I guess the Tennessee is positioning itself.
Yeah and you well you can see that those are probably LCTs or
going in I would guess. We've had veterans that were actually at Iwo's a veteran who actually
was a Marine that was there at D day at Iwo Jima and he remembers looking out onto the waters and
said I've never seen so many uh crafts in his whole life. So many ships and boats and cruisers and
destroyers and uh and the Tennessee was one of them. Yep. This photograph in the next winter
fascinating we have not talked yet about about this we will in 1945. The next major attack to the
Tennessee was a suicide plane that found its mark and these first two photographs on the left of
the right. This is just seconds before the suicide plane hit at the quarter neck and that's the
moment of impact right there of the suicide plane hitting the Tennessee and in a moment we're
going to get you to talk about that because this uh this came in April the 12th 1945
and uh those pictures were actually still shot so taken from a film and finally I talk about uh
you're on the bottom left and talk about this picture and well these were some guys that I
worked with in the first lieutenant's office and the damage control group the kid on the right
was from Naked Oches his name was Cyril Roberts and Don Hampton on the left back and Joe Martinez
he was from New Orleans right and I I never heard from any of them I asked what I know that
Martinez is dead and I would guess that Hampton uh probably he was older right but the
guy from Naked Oches I finally tracked him down really really but he had uh had uh multiple strokes
and I talked to his wife and uh and wrote him a letter and sent him this picture and she said well
he smiled that's wonderful that's wonderful that's great matter of fact you just returned from a
from a reunion in South Dakota that I know that you were very excited about you have a reunion
every year yeah folks get together uh we've got about 85 including spouses right that's right and
uh South Dakota doesn't seem like the appropriate place to have a ship reunion but
what they try to do is is pass it around to different parts of the country so that
guys don't have to travel as far every time right next year it's in Knoxville Tennessee
I see and uh we saw the photographs and I want you to talk about April the 12th 1945 which also
coincidentally happened to be the day that FDR died that's correct uh talk about uh we just have a
few if you about five minutes left but I want you to talk about uh talk about that attack and
how you all survived it because not everybody did well no the uh planes of course came in as uh from
off the starboard bow the one that that uh hit us and I think we shot down four or five uh before
they got that close but this one made it in and he hit the yard arm uh off the bridge and then
tumble down and hit several of the open gun mounts and uh killed 26 I think that day
and injured maybe 120 people but had a bomb and uh it hit on a quarter deck just above our
compartment so we we had uh another didn't have any potatoes but we had a lot of damage we had
as I remember we had some oil lines and we also had the water lines that we had to to take
care of and nobody in our compartment was hit again so we were fortunate therefore you were
discharged in April of 1946 we are running out of time so we're going to have to move forward but
you did decide to come back rather than go to work at the farm came back and you went to
Texas saying him it was kind of tough for you because you hadn't been to school for four years
and it was it was kind of tough going but you all the side rather than go back to the farm to
stick with it and you graduated in four years from Texas saying that I would be because I graduated
in four years because I had to take 18 hours per semester to get all the uh credit in because my time
GI bill would have run out right and I didn't have any money to go so yeah it uh to me the
GI bill was one of the best things that they ever graduated from graduate from A&M in 1950 and that's
the same year that you uh you married Shirley I sure did and uh I lucked out there and you lucked
out there indeed and uh and then your your career took you uh to west Texas to the panhandle to
Lubbock and eventually to Andrews where you were in the banking business for some 30 something years
where you were you were kind of Mr Andrews I get the idea the president of the chamber of commerce
and you know if you're in a small town and can't say no you get to do a lot of things but it did
take up a lot of time but I enjoyed it right Andrews was probably one of the best small towns
that we ever lived in. Herfberg would have been herfberg for a while and it was a good town.
Right eventually you retired and you came back uh to to the area back to the Leon area but uh then
because of health problems because of heart problems you wanted to get near some good doctors and
that's sort of what brought you back to the town of your alma mater to college and uh we have a place
up in the county that we needed to to look after and and at the time you know we had
one of our sons lived in the woodlands right one lived in Georgetown and um the daughter lived in
Denver and of course that was out of the picture so this was near and so we felt comfortable here
and we're we this is another we've never lived in a place we didn't like we've always enjoyed
ever where we've ever lived and college station is uh is a fine town. It needed is and we're glad
to have you and surely have seven grandkids and one great grandchild one great and I know that
you're you're proud of them and they're all proud of you yep indeed we're just about out of time
but I want to thank you very very much for your service the time goes goes very very quickly but
I want to thank you for your service and in your retirement and college station I know you
and surely you're enjoying it we are we we've done a lot of traveling indeed and he could
plan to continue to do traveling out uh yeah along as the old wings stay vertical
that's the idea thank you Gerald thank you for your service and thank you for being with us
the stick with it attitude that Gerald McCaskill used to get through Texas A&M was certainly
acquired by his brave service aboard the USS Tennessee from June 44 to September 45 BB-43 the
Tennessee was certainly a proud ship that served from Pearl Harbor and beyond and Gerald McCaskill
was later one of his proud sailors we salute Gerald McCaskill for his World War II service please
join us next time on Veterans of the Valley